Software engineering has been defined as the establishment and use of sound engineering principles in order to obtain economically developed software that is reliable and works efficiently on real machines "Bauer 1968.In other words it is a discipline that is done systematically in developing, operating and maintenance of software. Traditional programming focuses more on scripting and writing of code(coding) whereas for software programming it focuses on the whole process that is involved in creating, executing and maintenance of software. Software programming is broader, while traditional coding only narrows down to coding in a way, you can say traditional programming is a step inside software engineering.
 Software Development Life Cycle is a structured process used by software engineers to develop software. It acts as a roadmap, highlighting every single step that is to be covered to develop quality software. It has the:
planning phase 
Requirement analysis
design
implementation 
testing phase
deployment phase
maintenance phase
Some of the models that have been used in software development include the agile model and the waterfall model. Just like the name Agile the project is divided into smaller factions let me call them milestones or sprints. While one milestone is being worked on, it can be reviewed by the client and feedback provided and changes made. its highly flexible and there is continuous testing and integration. this limits the amount of documentation involved whereas Waterfall model is quite different. The client is only involved pre the project. His or her input is considered at the beginning and at the completion of the project. With this model there is a lot of documentation and it is least flexible as it is quite difficult to make changes during the process.

Requirement engineering first defines the problem scope and then links all subsequent development information to it (Google Books, 2022). Basically, it involves defining the project, documenting and maintaining the requirements for the software being developed. This forms the basis for every project. This gives developers control over the project ensuring quality software is produced meeting all requirements, it improves communication between the team and the client, it reduces risk and it economizes on time and cost.

Modularity involves dividing a software system into smaller self-contained units or modules, with each unit having a specific function. These can be worked on, tested and maintained independently but work together to form a complete system. I like to think of this as the old social policy of divide and concur, as with these changes in one unit won’t affect the other units, it enhances parallel development and performance is optimized for each section which eventually guarantees quality software.

Testing. Before any product is rolled out, like vaccines or drugs they have to do human trials where a few individuals are selected as test subjects, they are observed and data collected. In software engineering testing helps identify and fix bugs and defects before deployment. This ensures the software meets the required standards and functions properly. They are different types of testing each with different objectives for example unit testing, tests different modules or components of the software ensuring each unit performs as expected.
Integration testing focuses on integrated units or components ensuring they work and interact correctly
System testing this ensures the entire system functions correctly as a whole.it tests the complete and integrated software system
Acceptance testing checks and compares the software to the user requirements ensuring the software is ready for delivery
Regression testing on the other hand ensures the new changes do not adversely affect the software functionality
Version Control System. It in a way helps developers contribute, add, fix on different source codes or other project files for example for open-source softwares’. Git is an example of a version control system where it helps with collaboration on a project, it tracks changes, allows for merging and branching while at the same time maintaining a version history.  A story is told of a developer who kept using a product but discovered a bug that bothered him, so he applied for a job in that product company, fixed the bug, and quit, well version control systems fix this, you can contribute freely on a project, fix that bug that bothers you.
 
A software project manager plans a project, define its scopes, schedules and establishes the timelines, he identifies and estimates resources, manages the team, assesses the risk and acts as a bridge between the client and the team working on the project. But with this it also has its shortcomings including resource constraints, unforeseen risks and technology changes.


Software maintenance helps in fixing bugs, correcting faults, improving performance and making the software adapt to the ever-changing environment. For example, the AI wave came and every developer including Microsoft google had to alter, make their software’s accommodate the new AI or simply some basic end user preference like the black mode. With maintenance developers are able to keep their software up to date with the changes. Fixing bugs is corrective maintenance which ensures reliability, Dark mode is perfective maintenance for the end users’ satisfaction, accommodating Ai is adaptive maintenance for adaptability. Preventive maintenance reduces the likelihood of future problems and makes the software easier to maintain hence cost efficient.
 
Ethics explore what actions are right or wrong. Some of the ethical issues software developers are likely to face include privacy-user privacy, security -ensure software can’t be hacked or have countermeasures in place, transparency especially when it comes to users’ data TikTok have been in trouble for this, fairness, accountability and intellectual property rights for others. Software engineers can adhere to ethical standards by adopting a code of ethics, engaging in continuous learning to stay updated, implementing ethical practices in development, being transparent and accountable, and generally promoting ethical awareness.

